Title: Brad Weslake &bull; Current Research
Categories: research/current
Summary: Current.
Template: research

# Current

### Under Review ###

“Exclusion Excluded” \[[<span class="small">PDF</span>][1]\] \[[<span class="small">PhilPapers</span>][2]\]

> I argue that an independently attractive account of causation and causal explanation provides a principled resolution of the exclusion problem. 

“A Partial Theory of Actual Causation” \[[<span class="small">PDF</span>][3]\] \[[<span class="small">PhilPapers</span>][4]\]

> One part of the true theory of actual causation is a set of conditions responsible for eliminating all of the non-causes of an effect that can be discerned at the level of counterfactual structure.  I defend a proposal for this part of the theory.

“Proportionality, Contrast and Explanation” \[[<span class="small">PDF</span>][5]\] \[[<span class="small">PhilPapers</span>][6]\]

> I explore the connections between the idea that causes must be proportional to their effects, the idea that causation is contrastive, and the idea that more general explanations are superior in one respect to less general explanations.

### In Progress ###

“Causation, Counterfactual Dependence, and the Transition Problem”

> I identify a general problem for theories of the temporal asymmetry of counterfactual dependence, and argue that solving the problem requires giving up on the idea that the asymmetry of dependence is an intrinsic feature of a situation.

“Difference-Making, Closure and Exclusion”

> Consider the following causal exclusion principle: For all distinct properties F and F* such that F* supervenes on F, F and F* do not both cause a property G.  Peter Menzies and Christian List have proven that it follows from a natural conception of causation as difference-making that this exclusion principle is not generally true.  Rather, it turns out that whether the principle is true is a contingent matter.  In addition, they have shown that in a wide range of empirically ordinary cases, it follows that F* causes G and F does not.  These cases plausibly include instances where F* is a mental property and F and G are physical properties.  If this is the right conception of causation, it therefore turns out that the physical world is not causally closed.  In this paper I show that there is an alternative conception of causation as difference-making that does not have the same consequences.  Whether the physical world is causally closed therefore turns out to depend, *inter alia*, on which conception of difference-making is correct.  I conclude by suggesting some reasons to prefer the alternative conception.

“Statistical Mechanical Imperialism”

> I argue against the claim, advanced by David Albert and Barry Loewer, that all non-fundamental laws can be derived from those required to underwrite the second law of thermodynamics.

[1]: http://goo.gl/udoXh
[2]: http://goo.gl/TIII1
[3]: http://goo.gl/vi3fv
[4]: http://goo.gl/mH6hh
[5]: http://goo.gl/iAB3v
[6]: http://goo.gl/O1g9L
